Definition :  A chatterbot is a computer program that simulates human conversation through voice commands or text chats or both.Chatterbot, short for chatterbot, is an artificial intelligence (AI) feature that can be embedded and used through any major messaging application.

Term :  The term ChatterBot was originally coined by Michael Mauldin (creator of the first Verbot, Julia) in 1994 to describe these conversational programs. Today, most chatterbots are either accessed via virtual assistants such as Google Assistant and Amazon Alexa, via messaging apps such as Facebook Messenger or WeChat, or via individual organizations' apps and websites. chatterbots can be classified into usage categories such as conversational commerce (e-commerce via chat), analytics, communication, customer support, design, developer tools, education, entertainment, finance, food, games, health, HR, marketing, news, personal, productivity, shopping, social, sports, travel, and utilities.

Background :  In 1950, Alan Turing's famous article Computing Machinery and Intelligence was published, which proposed what is now called the Turing test as a criterion of intelligence. This criterion depends on the ability of a computer program to impersonate a human in a real-time written conversation with a human judge sufficiently well that the judge is unable to distinguish reliability on the basis of the conversational content alone between the program and a real human.

Development :  The classic historic early chatterbots are ELIZA (1966) and PARRY (1972).More recent notable programs include A.L.I.C.E., Jabberwacky and D.U.D.E (Agence Nationale de la Recherche and CNRS 2006). While ELIZA and PARRY were used exclusively to simulate typed conversation, many chatterbots now include functional features such as games and web searching abilities. In 1984, a book called The Policeman's Beard is Half Constructed was published, allegedly written by the chatterbot Racter (though the program as released would not have been capable of doing so).

Messaging apps :  Many companies' chatterbots run on messaging apps like Facebook Messenger (since 2016), WeChat (since 2013),WhatsApp, LiveChat, Kik, Slack, Line, Telegram, or simply via SMS. They are used for B2C customer service, sales and marketing.In 2016, Facebook Messenger allowed developers to place chatterbots on their platform. There were 30,000 bots created for Messenger in the first six months, rising to 100,000 by September 2017.The bots usually appear as one of the user's contacts, but can sometimes act as participants in a group chat.


As part of company apps and websites :  Previous generations of chatterbots were present on company websites, e.g. Ask Jenn from Alaska Airlines which debuted in 2008 or Expedia's virtual customer service agent which launched in 2011.The newer generation of chatterbots includes IBM Watson-powered Rocky, introduced in February 2017 by the New York City-based e-commerce company Rare Carat to provide information to prospective diamond buyers.

Company internal platforms :  Other companies explore ways they can use chatterbots internally, for example for Customer Support, Human Resources, or even in Internet-of-Things (IoT) projects. Overstock.com, for one, has reportedly launched a chatterbot named Mila to automate certain simple yet time-consuming processes when requesting for a sick leave.Other large companies such as Lloyds Banking Group, Royal Bank of Scotland, Renault and Citroën are now using automated online assistants instead of call centres with humans to provide a first point of contact. A SaaS chatterbot business ecosystem has been steadily growing since the F8 Conference when Zuckerberg unveiled that Messenger would allow chatterbots into the app.

Toys :  Chatterbots have also been incorporated into devices not primarily meant for computing such as toys.Hello Barbie is an Internet-connected version of the doll that uses a chatterbot provided by the company ToyTalk,which previously used the chatterbot for a range of smartphone-based characters for children.These characters' behaviors are constrained by a set of rules that in effect emulate a particular character and produce a storyline.IBM's Watson computer has been used as the basis for chatterbot-based educational toys for companies such as CogniToys intended to interact with children for educational purposes.

Creation : The process of creating a chatterbot follows a pattern similar to the development of a web page or a mobile app. It can be divided into Design, Building, Analytics and Maintenance.

Design : The design is the process that defines the interaction between the user and the chatterbot.The chatterbot designer will define the chatterbot personality, the questions that will be asked to the users, and the overall interaction.It can be viewed as a subset of the conversational design. In order to speed up this process, designers can use dedicated chatterbot design tools, that allow for immediate preview, team collaboration and video export.An important part of the chatterbot design is also centered around user testing. User testing can be performed following the same principles that guide the user testing of graphical interfaces.

Building : The process of building a chatterbot can be divided into two main tasks :  understanding the user's intent and producing the correct answer. The first task involves understanding the user input. In order to properly understand a user input in a free text form, a Natural Language Processing Engine can be used.The second task may involve different approaches depending on the type of the response that the chatterbot will generate.

Analytics : The usage of the chatterbot can be monitored in order to spot potential flaws or problems. It can also provide useful insights that can improve the final user experience.

Maintenance : To keep chatterbots up to speed with changing company products and services, traditional chatterbot development platforms require ongoing maintenance. This can either be in the form of an ongoing service provider or for larger enterprises in the form of an in-house chatterbot training team.To eliminate these costs, some startups are experimenting with Artificial Intelligence to develop self-learning chatterbots, particularly in Customer Service applications.

Platform :  The process of building, testing and deploying chatterbots can be done on cloud based chatterbot development platforms offered by cloud Platform as a Service (PaaS) providers such as Yekaliva, Oracle Cloud Platform, SnatchBot and IBM Watson.These cloud platforms provide Natural Language Processing, Artificial Intelligence and Mobile Backend as a Service for chatterbot development.

API : There are many APIs available for building your own chatterbots, such as AARC.

Malicious :  Malicious chatterbots are frequently used to fill chat rooms with spam and advertisements, by mimicking human behaviour and conversations or to entice people into revealing personal information, such as bank account numbers. They are commonly found on Yahoo! Messenger, Windows Live Messenger, AOL Instant Messenger and other instant messaging protocols. There has also been a published report of a chatterbot used in a fake personal ad on a dating service's website.